[DOC-10792] Add OBJECT_TYPES/OBJECT_TYPES_NESTED functions (#331)
couchbaselabs/docs-devex: modules/n1ql/pages/n1ql-language-reference/objectfun.adoc

====

[[fn-obj-pairs,OBJECT_PAIRS()]]
== OBJECT_PAIRS(`expression` [, `options` ])

_Alias_: *OBJECT_OUTER_PAIRS(`expression` [, `options` ])*

=== Description

This function returns an array of objects, containing the names and values of each attribute in the input object. 
It also provides an option to return attribute types instead of values. 

The function is particularly useful when iterating over multiple objects in an array, as it collates the values from similarly-named attributes into a single nested array. 
However, if an object does not contain a shared attribute name, it returns a null entry, similar to an OUTER JOIN.

For an illustration, refer to the examples below.

=== Arguments

expression:: An expression representing an object.

options:: [Optional]
A JSON object specifying options for the function.

=== Options

[options="header", cols="1a,3a,1a"]
|===
| Name | Description | Schema

| **types** +

> __required__

Author: A little confused here -- should this be a required or optional parameter?

Reviewer: As discussed, I think the `options` argument is optional, but if you're going to have an `options` argument the `types` parameter is required. Semantically if not syntactically

| Determines whether to return attribute types or values.

If TRUE, the function returns the name and type of each attribute.

If FALSE, the function returns the name and value of each attribute.

*Default:* `FALSE`
| Boolean
|===

=== Return Value

An array of objects, each containing the following attributes:

> name:: The name of an attribute in the source object.

Reviewer: It's up to you, but for consistency I think we should probably reformat the return value to use a table with exactly the same layout as the options table.

Author: Formatted it into a table.

However, if an object does not contain a shared field name, it returns a null entry, similar to an OUTER JOIN.

For an illustration, refer to the examples below.

=== Arguments

object:: An expression representing an object.

options:: [Optional] A JSON object specifying options for the function. 

=== Options

[options="header", cols="1a,3a,1a"]
|===
| Name | Description | Schema

| **composites** +
__optional__
| If TRUE, every level of every nested field is displayed.

If FALSE, only the deepest possible nested fields are returned.

*Default:* `FALSE`
| Boolean

| **pattern** +
__optional__
| A regular expression used to filter the returned paths.
The pattern is matched against the composite path names, not the individual field names.

| String

| **types** +
__optional__
| Determines whether to return field types or values.

If TRUE, the function returns the name and type of each field.

If FALSE, the function returns the name and value of each field.

*Default:* `FALSE`
| Boolean
|===

=== Return Value

An array of objects, each containing the following attributes:

> name:: The full path to every possible field within the source object, subject to the specified options.

Reviewer: Again, it's up to you, but for consistency I think we should probably reformat the return value to use a table with exactly the same layout as the options table.

Author: Formatted it into a table.

+
The result uses xref:n1ql-language-reference/nestedops.adoc[nested operators] to specify the path to all nested attributes or elements.
If any attribute names within a field path contain special characters, they are escaped using backticks (`{backtick}{backtick}`).

> val:: The value of a field in the source object; or an array, containing the collated values of similarly-named fields in the source objects.

Author: Changing "attribute" to "field" for consistency.

----
====

[[fn-obj-type,OBJECT_TYPES()]]
== OBJECT_TYPES(`expression`)

=== Description

> This function takes an object and returns a new one where all the values are replaced with their data types as reported by the TYPE() function.

Reviewer: Tweaking the wording slightly so that the description (hopefully) explains why you would use the function. Added link to TYPES() function.

```suggestion
This function returns the data type of every field in the supplied object, as reported by the xref:n1ql-language-reference/typefun.adoc#fn-type-type[TYPE()] function.
```

=== Arguments

expression:: An expression representing an object.

=== Return Value

An object with the same fields as the input object, but with all values replaced by their corresponding data types. 

=== Example

[[obj-type-ex,OBJECT_TYPES() Example]]
====
.Query
[source,sqlpp]
----

> SELECT OBJECT_TYPES({"flight":"AI444","duration":180,"gate":NULL,"aircraft":{"model":"Boeing 737"}}) 
>     AS object_types;

Reviewer: Adding some line breaks so the whole query is visible on narrower monitors

```suggestion
SELECT OBJECT_TYPES({"flight": "AI444",
                     "duration": 180,
                     "gate": NULL,
                     "aircraft": {"model": "Boeing 737"}}) 
    AS object_types;
```

----

.Results
[source,json]
----
[
    {
        "object_types":{
            "flight":"string",
            "duration":"number",
            "gate":"null",
            "aircraft":"object"
        }
    }
]
----
====

[[fn-obj-types-nested,OBJECT_TYPES_NESTED()]]
== OBJECT_TYPES_NESTED(`expression`)

=== Description

> This function takes an object and returns a new one where all non-composite field values replaced with their data types as reported by the TYPE() function. 
> Additionally, all composite type fields (ARRAYs and OBJECTs) are recursively processed in the same way, ensuring that all nested values are also replaced with their types. 

Reviewer: Tweaking the wording slightly so that the description (hopefully) explains why you would use the function.  Added link to TYPES() function.

```suggestion
This function returns the data type of every non-composite field in the supplied object, as reported by the xref:n1ql-language-reference/typefun.adoc#fn-type-type[TYPE()] function.
Additionally, all composite type fields (ARRAYs and OBJECTs) are recursively processed in the same way, returning the data types of all nested values. 
```

=== Arguments

expression:: An expression representing an object.

=== Return Value

An object with the same fields as the input object, but with all values replaced by their corresponding non-composite data types. 

=== Example

[[obj-type-nested-ex,OBJECT_TYPES_NESTED() Example]]
====
.Query
[source,sqlpp]
----

> SELECT OBJECT_TYPES_NESTED({"flight":"AI444","crewMembers":["Alice Bobson","John Flo",true],"gate":NULL,"aircraft":{"model":"Boeing 737", "capacity":200}}) 
>     AS object_types_nested;

Reviewer: Adding some line breaks

```suggestion
SELECT OBJECT_TYPES_NESTED({"flight":"AI444",
                            "crewMembers": ["Alice Bobson",
                                            "John Flo",
                                            true],
                            "gate": NULL,
                            "aircraft": {"model": "Boeing 737",
                                         "capacity":200}}) 
    AS object_types_nested;
```
